---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage[margin=1.9cm]{geometry}
---


Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 13th March 2018 8:30-13:30

**Teachers:** Thomas Svedberg (office/mobile: 031- 772 1522), Mikael Öhman (mobile: 0736 837 674)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 10:00 and 12:00

**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number
(from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do
not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder,
e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the
end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced at the latest on 27th March on the course homepage.
The review will be the same day (27th) 12:20-13:00 and on the 3rd April 12:20-13:00, both times at Hörsalsvägen 7b,
3:rd floor.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 26 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage

# Question 1 (6p)

In Linux-like systems we have 2 files that contain a list of the system users and groups.
These files are traditionally called `"passwd"` and `"group"` respectively.

The format of the `passwd` file (containing user information) is as

```
username:password:user_id:group_id:description:home_dir:shell
```

and the `group` file as

```
group:password:user1,user2,user3
```

Typically, passwords are not stored in plain text, and the letter `x` is used as a replacement to indicate they are
stored encrypted outside the file. The description is the full name of the user.

A typical `passwd` file may look like:

```
sys:x:3:3:sys:/dev/:/usr/bin/nologin
mail:x:8:8:mail:/dev/:/usr/bin/nologin
huey:quack:500:500:Hubert Duck:/home/huey:/bin/bash
dewey:quacky:501:501:Deuteronomy Duck:/home/huey:/bin/bash
louie:quackers:502:502:Louis Duck:/home/huey:/bin/bash
gizmoduck:x:503:503:Fenton Crackshell:/home/gizmo:/bin/bash
goofy:x:504:504:George G. Geef:/home/goofy/:/bin/bash
chip:x:600:600:Chip:/home/goofy/:/bin/bash
dale:x:600:600:Dale:/home/goofy/:/bin/bash
```

and a typical `group` file as:

```
ducks:x:huey,dewey,louie,gizmoduck
super-hero:x:gizmoduck
rodents:x:chip,dale
clumsy:x:gizmoduck,goofy,dale
```

We wish to create a tool to display this data for a system administrator in a different way, so you will need to read
these files and output a different format.

## Part A (1p)

Write a function, `read_users` which parses the `passwd` file into a dictionary.
Ignore all entries with `user_id` below 500, as these are reserved for running the system services.

We don't need all fields from either file, see below for usage:

```python
>> names = read_users('passwd.txt')
>> print(names['huey'])
Hubert Duck
```

## Part B (2p)

Write a function `read_groups` that reads the group file into a dictionary that maps `user -> groups`, see example
usage:

```python
>> groups = read_groups('groups.txt')
>> print(groups['dale'])
['rodents', 'clumsy']
```

*Hint: You may find `defaultdict` from `collections` helpful.*

## Part C (3p)

Write a function `print_user_table(names, groups)` which prints a nicely formatted table like this:

```
User  | Name             | Groups
------+------------------+-------
chip  | Chip             | rodents
dale  | Dale             | rodents, clumsy
dewey | Deuteronomy Duck | ducks
...
```

The `User` and `Name` column should widen to automatically fit the longest user and name. It should be sorted according
to the username (the first column).

\newpage

# Question 2 (7p)

In this task NumPy and SciPy **must** be used for any array-type of numerical data.

As part of an evaluation of a new feature, the results from a customer satisfaction survey shall be evaluated and
the best value for the design parameter should be chosen.

The results are gathered in file (with text format).

**NOTE! You should use no loops whatsoever to loop over the input data!**

## Part A (0.5p)

Read the data from the file named `"values.txt"` into NumPy-arrays `x`, `y1` and `y2`.

The first column in the file represent the design parameter (x-values), the second and third columns are the results of
two customer satisfaction questions (y1 and y2-values).

## Part B (1p)

Plot the x-y1 and x-y2-values using point markers of different colors.
The plot should have proper x- and y-labels, a legend describing the different curves as well as a suitable title.

## Part C (3p)

Looking at the plot you can see that good approximations for the curves should be a quadratic or maybe a linear
approximation (polynomial).

As an example, a second order polynomial can be written as:
$$y = A + B x + C x^2$$

Using a suitable method from NumPy or SciPy, and using polynomial of order 1 and 2, find the parameters (A, B for the first
order polynomial and A, B, C for the second order polynomial) that gives the smallest least-squares error given
the x-y-data from the input file.

Print the resulting parameters (A-B respectively A-C), with labels, for both the x-y1 and x-y2 data sets.

In the exact same way as above (i.e. with legend, labels etc.), plot the resulting polynomials in the plot.

Hint: You will probably need to construct a function representing the equation above.

Remember that you should have (a lot) more data (`x`) values ploting the line than for the original data!


## Part D (2.5p)

To find the 'best' value for `x` we chose the value that gives the highest minimum in the custom satisfactory survey.
This value is found as the intersection of the two lines.


Use the second-order polynomial approximations from Part C for `y1`, and use first order and second order approximations
for `y2`. Find the 'best' choice of the design parameter `x`.
Note: you should find different values of `x` for the two different y2-approximations.

Use a suitable method from NumPy/SciPy to find these intersections.

Plot the resulting x-y-values in the plot.


\newpage

# Question 3 (6p)

## Part A (1p)

Write a class `Color` which stores red, green, and blue components as values ranging from 0 to 1.
If all 3 values are 0, we have no light (black), and if all values are 1, we have full light (white).

Add support for `repr` which should output e.g.: `Color(red=0.25, green=0.75, blue=0.50)`


## Part B (2.5p)

As we can only have one constructor in Python, it's sometimes common to create additional "constructor" using static methods.
Write a static method `from_html` that takes a string in the format `'#RRGGBB'` (where `RR`, `GG`, `BB`, are values stored in
hexadecimal, ranging from 0-255) and returns a matching `Color` instance.

```python
hot_pink = Color.from_html('#F81894')  # red ~ 0.973, green ~ 0.094, blue ~ 0.58
```

*Hint: You can tell int to parse a string as hexadecimal (base 16) by doing `int(x, 16)`*

Also implement the method `html` that returns a string of the `Color` in the format `'#RRGGBB'`

```python
>> print(hot_pink.html())
#F81894
```

*Hint: the '{:x}' format specifier writes an integer in hexadecimal*

## Part C (1p)
Implement support for the `+` operator, so that two colors can be added. The red, green, and blue values should be capped `<= 1.0`.

```python
>> eletric_violet = Color(red=0.62, green=0, blue=0.25)
>> atomic_tangerine = Color(red=1, green=0.6, blue=0.4)
>> x = eletric_violet + atomic_tangerine
>> print(x)
Color(red=1, green=0.6, blue=0.65)
```

## Part D (0.5p)

Implement support for `==` comparison.

## Part E (1p)

Add a check when constructing the a color that the red, green and blue channels are all within the range 0 to 1. If any channel is outside the range, it should raise a suitable exception.

Verify that it works as intended by checking with a `try-except` block.

\newpage

# Question 4 (7p)

In this question, you will design a small matrix class hierarchy.
There is a test file you can use with your code: `test_question4.py`

## Part A (2p)
Create an abstract base class `BaseMatrix` that stores number of `rows` and `columns`.

Implement the subclass `SymmetricMatrix` which should only store the upper half of a symmetric matrix to save memory:

```python
symm = SymmetricMatrix([[1, 2, 3],
                           [4, 5],
                              [6])
```

Implement the subclass `Matrix` which just stores the values as a list of lists:

```python
mat = Matrix([[1, 2, 3],
              [4, 5, 6],
              [7, 8, 9])
```

Implement the subclass `ABCDMatrix` which takes 4 other matrices and represents
$$\begin{pmatrix}A & B \\ C & D
\end{pmatrix}$$


```python
a = SymmetricMatrix(...)
b = Matrix(...)
...

m = ABCDMatrix(a, b, c, d)
```



## Part B (2.5p)

Implement support for indexing via `matrix[row, column]` for all 3 subclasses:

```python
symm = SymmetricMatrix([[1, 2, 3],
                           [4, 5],
                              [6])

print(symm[1,2], 'is the same as', symm[2,1], 'in symmetric matrices!')
```

\newpage
## Part C (2.5p)
Add a astract method to `BaseMatrix` called `transpose`, which should return a copy of the transposed matrix.
Implement this method for your 3 subclasses.

Note: A transposed matrix is like switching row and column indices
```python
a = Matrix([[1, 2, 3],
            [4, 5, 6])
a_t = a.transpose()
# Should give the same matrix as:
a_t = Matrix([[1, 4],
              [2, 5],
              [3, 6]])
```

For a block matrix, remember that
$$
\begin{pmatrix}A & B \\ C & D\end{pmatrix}^T = \begin{pmatrix}A^T & C^T \\ B^T & D^T\end{pmatrix}
$$

*Hint: `import copy.deepcopy` for copying a `list` of `list` (of objects)*
