---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage[margin=1.9cm]{geometry}
---


Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 8th June 2017 8:30-13:30

**Teachers:** Thomas Svedberg (office/mobile: 031- 772 1522), Mikael Öhman (mobile: 0736 837 674)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 10:00 and 12:00

**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number (from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder, e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced at the latest on 20th of June on the course homepage.
The review will be the same day (20th) 12:20-13:00 and on the 26th of Juny 12:20-13:00, both times at Hörsalsvägen 7b,
3:rd floor.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 25 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage

Question 1 (6p total)
==========

The goal here is to make a file with text prettier by cutting lines after a given number of columns (characters).

Part A (3p)
----------

Read the input file `input_example.txt` into a list of paragraphs.
Each paragraph is split by one or more empty lines.

Example:
```python
>>> paragraphs = read_paragraphs('small_input.txt')
>>> print(paragraphs)
[['This', 'is', 'an', 'example.', 'This', 'is', 'paragraph', 'one.'],
 ['Now', 'we', 'are', 'onto', 'the', 'second', 'paragraph!'],
 ['Finally,', 'the', 'last', 'paragraph.']
]
```

Each paragraph should be stored as a list of words.

Part B (3p)
----------

Write a function `format_file(paragraphs, output, max_cols=80)` which takes the paragraphs and hyphenation rules.

 * Linebreaks should be applied if the content doesn't fit within `num_cols` characters.
 * Every new paragraph should be indented by 4 spaces.

See `example_output.txt` for how it should look (based on `example_input.txt`, and 80 column width).

Use:
```python
>>> paragraphs = read_paragraphs('example_input.txt')
>>> format_file(paragraphs, 'student_output.txt')
```

*Hint: `len` for counting characters.*

You do **not** need to hyphenate words. You **may** assume the no words are longer than `max_cols`.

**Do not submit multiple copies of Part A or Part B. You may write all of these in the same file. Handing in multiple solutions results in ZERO POINTS.**

\newpage

Question 2 (6p total)
==========

In this task NumPy and SciPy **must** be used for any array-type of numerical data as well as for doing the interpolation etc.

From an experiment we recieve a file of data in text format.
We want what function best describes the data.

Part A (0.5p)
-------------
Read the data from the file named "values.txt" into NumPy-arrays X and Y.

The first column in the file represent the X-values, and the second column the Y-values.

Part B (2.5p)
------------
Using a suitable method from the SciPy interpolate module, construct splines of order 2 and smoothing set to **None**,
**0** and **15** respectively, from the given x-y-data.

Using a 2-row by 1-column subplot plot the original x-y-values using point markers and the derived splines using lines
in subplot 1.

Remember that you should have (a lot) more data values for the splines than for the original data!

The plot should have proper x- and y-labels, a legend describing the different curves as well as a suitable title.

What seems to be the best smoothing for the spline? (answer with a comment in the code)

Part C (3p)
-----------
As a result of the evaluation above, and using some knowledge of the process generating the data, it is deemed that the
values probably will be well described using a polynomial.

As an example, a forth order polynomial can be written as:
$$y = A + B x + C x^2 + D x^3 + E x^4$$

Using a suitable method from NumPy or SciPy, and using polynomial of order 2, 3 and 4, find the parameters (A-E for
the forth order polynomial shown above) that gives the smallest least-squares error given
the x-y-data from the input file.

Print the resulting parameters (A-E for the forth order polynomial), with labels.

In the exact same way as above (i.e. with legend, labels etc.), plot the results in the last subplot.

Hint: You will need to construct a function representing the equation above.

What polynomial order is sufficent? (answer with a comment in the code)


\newpage

Question 3 (5p total)
=====================

In this task you **should not** use any **built-in** complex number functionality!

# A complex numbers library

A complex number (written in Cartesian form) is a number $z = a + bi$ where $a$ is the real part, $b$ is the imaginary part and $i^2 = -1$. Binary operations are defined by e.g.

$$
\begin{aligned}
(a + bi) + (c + di) &= (a + c) + (b + d)i \\
(a + bi) * (c + di) &= (a * c - b * d) + (a * d + b * c)i \\
\end{aligned}
$$

The absolute value is defined as $|a + bi| = \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}$. A complex number can also be written on polar form as $z = (r, \theta)$ where $r = |z|$ and $\theta = \arctan(b / a)$ (in the correct quadrant). Converting from polar form to Cartesian form is done with $a = r \cos(\theta)$ and $b = r \sin(\theta)$.

The complex module
-------------------------

In this task you will create a module suitable for doing some simple operations with complex numbers. The name of the module should be `complex`. It should contain the following:

* A `class` named `Complex` which is used to create complex numbers. It should contain:
    * Constructor such that `Complex(a, b)` creates the complex number `a + bi` and `Complex(a)` should create the complex number `a + 0im`.
    * Pretty string conversion: Numbers should be printed as:
         * `print(Complex(2, 3))` --- `2 + 3im`
         * `print(Complex(2))` --- `2 + 0im`
         * `print(Complex(2, -3))` --- `2 - 3im`

    * Binary operations between `Complex` numbers. You only have to implement `+` and `*`. These functions should also work if one of the numbers is a real number as in `5 + Complex(3, 2)`.
    * Methods `real` and `imag` returning the real and imaginary component, respectively.
    * Absolute value (by implementing the `__abs__(self)` method)
    * A method `topolar` converting the complex number to a tuple `(r, theta)`. Hint, look at `math.atan2`.
    * A static method `frompolar(r, theta)` that returns an instance of `Complex`.
    * If `<` or `>` is used, an `UnorderedException` should be thrown, telling the user that complex numbers are unordered (can not be compared with e.g. `<`).
    * `==` between `Complex` numbers
* A global variable `im` defined as $1i$.

## Examples

An example code and the expected output is shown below:

### Code

```python
from complex import Complex, im

print("Printing")
print(Complex(2,3))
print(Complex(5))
print(Complex(2, -3))

z1 = Complex(2, 3)

print("\nImag / Real")
print(z1.imag())
print(z1.real())

z2 = Complex(4, -2)

print("\nArithmethic")
print(z1 + z2)
print(3 + z1)
print(z1 * z2)
print(5 * z1)
print(z1 * 5)
print(abs(z1))
print(z1 == z1)

print("\nPolar")
r, theta = z1.topolar()
print("r = ", r, "theta = ", theta, "rad")
print(Complex.frompolar(r, theta))

print("\nException")
print(z1 < z1)
```

### Output

```
2 + 3im
5 + 0im
2 - 3im

Imag / Real
3
2

Arithmethic
6 + 1im
5 + 3im
14 + 8im
10 + 15im
10 + 15im
3.605551275463989
True

Polar
r =  3.605551275463989 theta =  0.982793723247329 rad
2.0 + 3.0im

Exception
Traceback (most recent call last):
    [...]
complex.UnorderedException: Complex numbers are unordered
```

\newpage


Question 4 (8p total)
=====================

Most long running applications have a need to use different logging methods.
The most common method is to simply write all messages to a file, but there are cases where the logging frequency would create files that are much to large for practical use, and we may want to only save the last N messages.
In this assignment, you will implement 2 file writing classes, which will enable a common logger class to write either all data, or the last N outputs, under a given filename.


Part A.1 (1p)
------------
Create a base class ```Writer``` which takes a `filename` in its `__init__`
This class should have 2  abstract methods:

* ```.write_line(text)``` which takes a line  of text to write.
* ```.flush()``` which "flushes" all the content to the file with the given  filename.
(In programming terms, flushing means to force-write all data to disk)


Part A.2 (2p)
------------
Implement the subclass ```DirectFileWriter``` which opens and writes each line to a file "like normal".
(This class is only a very simple wrapper for a file object.)

The file object you get from `open` has a method called `flush()` which you should call from your `flush` method.


Part A.3 (3p)
------------
Implement the subclass ```CircularWriter``` which has a cicular buffer which stores the last N lines of output in memory, and writes all of it to disk when `flush` is called.

A circular buffer consist of a list of length N, starts writing at index 0, and when it reaches N it restarts at 0 (overwriting the oldest entry).


Part B.1 (0.5p)
--------------
In this question you should implement a logging class with a single method `log` which uses the file writer from Part A.

Logging codes almost always has multiple levels of verbosity, commonly called "DEBUG", "WARNING", or "ERROR".
Create an `enum` which you can use to determine the logging level.

Part B.2 (1.5p)
--------------
Create a class ```Logger``` which takes a name of the logger, a logging level, date format (see example), and a `Writer` object (from part A).

Implement the method ```.log(level, msg)``` which takes a message, prepends a date, name, and log-level, formatted as:
```
[date-stamp] Name::LogLevel - Some important message.
``` 
Nothing should be printed if the level is below the log level (the levels are inclusive: `WARNING` also prints `ERROR` messages, and `DEBUG` alsos prints `WARNING`'s and `ERROR`'s.).

This is how you get a time stamp and use a custom date format:
```python
from datetime import datetime
time_stamp = datetime.now()
print(time_stamp.strftime('%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S'))

```

*Hint: Enums have a .name variable which you can use for formatting the string*

\newpage
Example:
```python
# Either writer should work for your logger:
use_circular = True

if use_circular:
    # We test it with a very small circular array:
    writer = CircularWriter(5, 'logfile.txt')
else:
    writer = DirectFileWriter('logfile.txt')

# We choose to store microseconds in this example since the test example is so brief:
logger = Logger('MyProgram', LogLevel.WARNING, '%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S.%f', writer)

logger.log(LogLevel.DEBUG, 'This debug message should be ignored!')
for i in range(10):
    logger.log(LogLevel.WARNING, 'Testing {}'.format(i))

logger.log(LogLevel.ERROR, 'This error should be printed last in the file.')
logger.log(LogLevel.DEBUG, 'And this shouldn\'t be in the file at all.')

# Force flush the buffer before exiting to ensure everything is written to file:
writer.flush()
```


