    The last question was asked for the first time, half in jest, on May 21, 
2061, at a time when humanity first stepped into the light. The question came 
about as a result of a five dollar bet over highballs, and it happened this way: 
    Alexander Adell and Bertram Lupov were two of the faithful attendants of 
Multivac. As well as any human beings could, they knew what lay behind the cold, 
clicking, flashing face -- miles and miles of face -- of that giant computer. 
They had at least a vague notion of the general plan of relays and circuits that 
had long since grown past the point where any single human could possibly have a 
firm grasp of the whole. 
    Multivac was self-adjusting and self-correcting. It had to be, for nothing 
human could adjust and correct it quickly enough or even adequately enough -- so 
Adell and Lupov attended the monstrous giant only lightly and superficially, yet 
as well as any men could. They fed it data, adjusted questions to its needs and 
translated the answers that were issued. Certainly they, and all others like 
them, were fully entitled to share In the glory that was Multivac's. 
    For decades, Multivac had helped design the ships and plot the trajectories 
that enabled man to reach the Moon, Mars, and Venus, but past that, Earth's poor 
resources could not support the ships. Too much energy was needed for the long 
trips. Earth exploited its coal and uranium with increasing efficiency, but 
there was only so much of both. 
    But slowly Multivac learned enough to answer deeper questions more 
fundamentally, and on May 14, 2061, what had been theory, became fact. 
    The energy of the sun was stored, converted, and utilized directly on a 
planet-wide scale. All Earth turned off its burning coal, its fissioning 
uranium, and flipped the switch that connected all of it to a small station, one 
mile in diameter, circling the Earth at half the distance of the Moon. All Earth 
ran by invisible beams of sunpower. 
    Seven days had not sufficed to dim the glory of it and Adell and Lupov 
finally managed to escape from the public function, and to meet in quiet where 
no one would think of looking for them, in the deserted underground chambers, 
where portions of the mighty buried body of Multivac showed. Unattended, idling, 
sorting data with contented lazy clickings, Multivac, too, had earned its 
vacation and the boys appreciated that. They had no intention, originally, of 
disturbing it. 
    They had brought a bottle with them, and their only concern at the moment 
was to relax in the company of each other and the bottle. 
    "It's amazing when you think of it," said Adell. His broad face had lines of 
weariness in it, and he stirred his drink slowly with a glass rod, watching the 
cubes of ice slur clumsily about. "All the energy we can possibly ever use for 
free. Enough energy, if we wanted to draw on it, to melt all Earth into a big 
drop of impure liquid iron, and still never miss the energy so used. All the 
energy we could ever use, forever and forever and forever." 
    Lupov cocked his head sideways. He had a trick of doing that when he wanted 
to be contrary, and he wanted to be contrary now, partly because he had had to 
carry the ice and glassware. "Not forever," he said. 
