---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage[margin=1.9cm]{geometry}
---


Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 7th June 2018 8:30-13:30

**Teacher:** Mikael Öhman (mobile: 0736 837 674)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 10:00 and 12:00

**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number
(from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do
not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder,
e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the
end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced at the latest on 21st June on the course homepage.
The review will be the same day (21st) 12:20-13:00 and on the 28th June 12:20-13:00, both times at Hörsalsvägen 7b,
3:rd floor.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 25 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage

# Question 1 (6p total)

You are administrating a public server with many users, and you need to audit the security.
As part of this, you need to look into successfull as well as failed login attempts.

The server prints all such events to a file, so now you want to parse and generate some useful statistics.
All events printed to the file looks like:
```text
[timestamp] - EVENTTYPE: MESSAGE
```
where example of successful and failed logins are:
```text
[2018-05-06T13:35:45] - LOGIN_FAILED: mikael@123.45.67.89
[2018-05-06T14:03:10] - LOGIN_SUCCESS: thomas@10.20.30.40
```
but there are also other type of events, like 
```text
[2018-06-06T15:35:45] - FILE_UPLOAD: "exam_results.txt" mikael@123.45.67.89
```
that we are not interested in. See `events.log` as an example.

## Part A (3p)

Write a function `parse_login_event` that parses login attempts, and returns a tuple containing:

1. Datetime of time stamp
2. Login status (true for success, false for fail)
3. Username
4. IP address (e.g. '123.45.67.89')

If it's not a login event, return `None` (the code should be able to ignore all possible types of events that are not login attempts).

**Example:**
```python
>>> x = parse_login_event('[2018-05-06T13:35:45] - LOGIN_FAILED: mikael@123.45.67.89')
>>> print(x)
(datetime.datetime(2018, 5, 6, 13, 35, 45), False, 'mikael', '123.45.67.89')
>>> y = parse_login_event('[2018-05-06T14:03:10] - LOGIN_SUCCESS: thomas@10.20.30.40')
>>> print(y)
(datetime.datetime(2018, 5, 6, 14, 3, 10), True, 'thomas', '10.20.30.40')
>>> z = parse_login_event('[2018-05-06T15:35:45] - FILE_UPLOAD: "exam_results.txt" mikael@123.45.67.89')
>>> print(z)
None
```

*Hint: Parsing is date + time is easy with `datetime.datetime.strptime` (check the standard library for details)*

## Part B (3p)

Write a function `login_stats(filename)` that takes an event log file and prints

- the IP with most failed attempts
- the user with most failed attempts
- a nicely formatted table with hourly breakdown of the number of successful and failed login attempts (you may assume a fixed max width of the table)

\newpage

**Example:**

```text
>>> login_stats('events.log')
Most failed IP: 59.232.36.168 (12 attempts)
Most failed user: glenn (25 attempts)
Hour | Failed | Success
-----|--------|--------
   0 |      4 |       0
   1 |     10 |       0
   2 |      1 |       0
   3 |      3 |       0
   4 |      5 |       0
   5 |      2 |       0
   6 |      1 |       2
   7 |      0 |       2
   8 |      0 |       3
   9 |      2 |       6
  10 |      1 |       6
  11 |      1 |       8
  12 |      0 |       5
  13 |      2 |       5
  14 |      1 |       2
  15 |      0 |       5
  16 |      2 |       2
  17 |      8 |       3
  18 |      8 |       1
  19 |      9 |       0
  20 |      8 |       0
  21 |      9 |       1
  22 |     15 |       2
  23 |      8 |       2
```

*Hint: The `collections` module has a __very__ useful `Counter` class.*

\newpage

<!---
# Question 2 (5p total)
As a result of an evaluation we have found that the process we are studying can be described by the function
$y = f (x) = (x - a) 2 + b \ sin(x)$ with $a = 2$ and $b = 15$.

To continue our study we need to find the minima and root(s) of this function.
Start by plotting the function in the intervall $-10 <= x <= 10$ to get a feel for how it looks.

Part A (2p)
-----------
Using the function minimize from the SciPy library optimize, find the local minima of the function using the methods:

* Conjugate Gradient (CG)
* Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)
* Powell (Powell)

and the starting guesses for $x$: 1, 5, 7, 10.

Print the resulting x, y values for each combination of method and start guess.

Part B (1p)
-----------
Find the global minima of the function using a global optimization method from the optimize library.
Print the resulting x, y values.

Part C (1p)
------------
Find the roots ($f (x) = 0$) of the function using a suitable method from the optimize library.

*Hint: You probably need to give different start guesses to find the different roots!*

Part D (1p)
-----------
Using a 2x2 subplot grid, plot the function for $-10 <= x <= 10$ in each subplot.

For each of the local methods in Part A, mark the minima found with a suitable marker in subplots 1-3.
In the fourth subplot, mark the global minima and roots with suitable markers. Make sure to use different markers for
minima and roots.

In all subplots add a title, axis labels etc.

*Hint: Matplotlib manual is extensive. You will likely find what you need in part I.*

\newpage
-->

# Question 2 (5p total)

In this task NumPy and SciPy **must** be used for any array-type of data as well as for doing the integration.

A common problem in chemistry is to calculate the concentration of a constituent in a stirred tank reactor.

The concentration of constituent *A* can be described by
$$\frac{\mathrm{d} C (t)}{\mathrm{d} t} = \frac{F(t)}{V} (C_{in} - C) - k C^2
$$

Here we use:
$C_{in} = 5.5$ mol/L, $V = 100$ L, $F(t) = 17.3$ L/min (constant) and $k = 0.18$ L/(mol*min)

## Part A (1p)

Create a function calculating $\frac{\mathrm{d} C (t)}{\mathrm{d} t}$ given the parameters above.

The function should take exactly two argument: $C$ and $t$

*Note: $t$ is only not really needed at this stage, but should be included for later use*

## Part B (2p)

Given the initial condition $C(0) = 0.3$ mol/L, find the time $t_1$ at which the concentration $C = C_1 = 1.0$ mol/L.

Answer with $t_1$ given two digit after the decimal comma. 

*Hint: Look at `odeint` form the SciPy library integrate*

*Hint: Plot the result $C$ for $t$ in the interval $0 \leq t \leq 10$*

## Part C (2p)

The process is considered stationary when the derivative  $\frac{\mathrm{d} C (t)}{\mathrm{d} t} < 10^{-2}$.

Find $t_2$ when that happens.

Answer with $t_2$ given two digit after the decimal comma.

*Hint: Add the derivative to the plot*

\newpage

# Question 3 (7p total)

A laboratory have found that they need a way to manage bookings of their equipment and have asked you to create
a library to be used as a backend in a web portal.

You have agreed on the API (application programming interface) described in the subtasks below.

## Part A (0.5p)
Create a class `Schedule` that takes the number of timeslots to manage in its constructor.
The `Schedule` should be able to keep track of information on who has reserved a slot (or if its available), see below for details.

## Part B (2p)
The web front-end for the laboratory will create one instance of the `Schedule` class for each instrument in the laboratory 
and expect the following methods to be available:

- `is_available(slot_id)`: should return True if a slot is available, else False
- `reserve(slot_id, name)`: should reserve the slot `slot_id` for `name`
- `release(slot_id)`: shoule release the reservation on `slot_id`

For simplicity, use integers for `slot_id` and strings for `name`.

## Part C (2p)
To make the library more robust, complement the methods above with exceptions:

- `NotFreeException`: When we try to reserve an already reserved slot
- `NotAllocatedException`: When we try to free a slot that is already free
- `InvalidSlotException`: When we provide an invalid `slot_id`

## Part D (2.5p)
For added convenience, we need a quick way to loop over the schedule.
The method `reserved()` should return an object which can iterate over the current reservations.
The iteration values should be a tuple of `slot_id` and `name`.

**Example**
```python
s = Schedule(10)
print(s.is_available(6))
s.reserve(3, "Thomas")
s.reserve(6, "Micke")
print(s.is_available(6))

for slot_id, name in s.reserved():
    print("{} is reserved by {}".format(slot_id, name))
    if s.is_available(8):
        s.reserve(8, "Thomas")
```
should yield
```text
True
False
Slot 3 is reserved by Thomas
Slot 6 is reserved by Micke
Slot 8 is reserved by Thomas
```

\newpage

# Question 4 (7p total)

In this question, you will implement classes for representing a simple file structure, which would be useful when
working on a library for a archive (like a zip file).
For the sake of keeping the exam question reasonably short, we will not consider the actual file contents, but only the
metadata (file structure, file names etc.)

You should generate some XML markup as shown in the example. (XML is simple markup language for storing and transporting
data.)


## Part A (2.5p)
Create a base class `Node` stores a variable `name`.
This class should have:

- a method `escaped_name` that returns the name of the node but every with special characters replaced (see list below).
- an abstract method `xml_structure` that takes an optional argument `indent` with a default value of 0
- an abstract operator for `len()` that computes the number of nodes in the entire tree recursively.

*Note: the name "node" is typically used in file systems for referring to an object, like a directory, file or link.*

- ampersand (`&`) is escaped to `&amp;`
- double quotes (`"`) are escaped to `&quot;`
- single quotes (`'`) are escaped to `&apos;`
- less than (`<`) is escaped to `&lt;`
- greater than (`>`) is escaped to `&gt;`

## Part B (2.5p)
Create a subclass `Directory` that takes a `name` and a list of `nodes` that it should contain:

- a method `xml_structure(indent)` should return a string that starts with 
`<directory name="escaped name here">`
then lists xml structure all the contained nodes, then ends with
`</directory>`
The contained nodes should be indented 4 spaces more than the current indent. See the example below on how it should look.

- a method `add_node(node)` that adds a node to the directory.
- Using `len` on a `Directory` object should return the sum of the `len` of all the contained nodes + 1 (for the directory itself).

## Part C (2p)
Implement a subclass `File` that takes a `name` and a bool `binary` which indicates if the file contains
binary data (or just text):

- The `len` of a file is always 1.
- Implement a method `xml_structure(indent)` that should return a string that looks like:
```xml
<file name="escaped name here" binary="yes or no" />
```
The string should be preceded with as many spaces as indicated by `indent`. Remember a line break (see the example)!

**Example**
```python
some_files = [File('Important data.dat', True), File('"Quotes" & jokes.txt', False)]
some_code = [File('important_python_code.py', False), File('cheat_sheet.py', False)]
code_dir = Directory('Code', some_code)
root = Directory('Directories can also have \'escaped\' characters', some_files)
root.add_node(code_dir)
print(root.xml_structure())
print("Total number of nodes in the tree is {}".format(len(root)))
```
should yield

```xml
<directory name="Directories can also have &apos;escaped&apos; characters">
    <file name="Important data.dat" binary="yes" />
    <file name="&quot;Quotes&quot; &amp; jokes.txt" binary="no" />
    <directory name="Code">
        <file name="important_python_code.py" binary="no" />
        <file name="cheat_sheet.py" binary="no" />
    </directory>
</directory>
```
```text
Total number of nodes in the tree is 6
```
