
Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 16th August 2016 8:30-12:30

**Teacher:** Thomas Svedberg (phone: 031 772 1522)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 9:30 and 11:30


**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number (from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder, e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced at the latest on 2nd of September on the course homepage.
The review will be the same day 12:20-13:00 and on the 9th of September 11:00-11:30.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 25 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage

Question 1 (6p total)
==========

Part A (2p)
-----------

Write the function camel_caser that converts strings from the format my_class_name to the “camel
case” naming convention: MyFunctionName

It should work as
```python
>>> x = camel_caser('my_class_name')
>>> print(x)
MyClassName
```

*Hint: Check through help(str)*


Part B (4p)
----------
While correction computer assignments you realize to your horror that many of the students have not
been following the standard naming conventions in Python! To correct this, you decide to write a script
that reads a file and replaces all occurances of incorrectly named classes, and writes the output to a
different file.

The script should take a file student_code.py:


```python
class numbered_card:
def __init__(self, value, suit):
self.value = value
self.suit = suit

class standard_deck:
def __init__(self):
self.cards = []
```

and produce the readable file readable_code.py:

```python
class NumberedCard:
def __init__(self, value, suit):
self.value = value
self.suit = suit

class StandardDeck:
def __init__(self):
self.cards = []
```
See the student_code.py, and readable_code.py files in the documentation folder.

Details: The script should handle the simple cases:
```python
class some_class:
```
but it does not have to handle
```python
class some_class(base_class):
```
It only needs to modify lines that start with class, you don’t have to track the usage of the class
(which would be more correct, but too difficult for an exam question).

*Hint: Remember to close the files*



Question 2 (5p total)
==========

Working efficiently with numerical matrices was the initial design goals of NumPy and SciPy.
In many scientific problems the need to assemble data into a matrix that you later need to process occur.
In this task you will examine the performance of assembling and multiplying matrix formats from NumPy and SciPy.

To simulate the assembling of a matrix we have created files with input data where each row contains: \newline
__row-index column-index value__

*Hint: use the following to read these files:*
```python
import numpy as np
ij = np.loadtxt(filename, usecols=[0, 1], dtype=np.int)
values = np.loadtxt(filename, usecols=[2], dtype=np.float)
```
*and the `time` module to measure time.*


The file `small.txt` contain values for a small matrix you can use while testing your code out, while the file `large.txt` contains the
matrix to be used when reporting the tasks below.

The matrix formats to be examined in this task are:

 * NumPy ndarray
 * SciPy CSC matrix
 * SciPy CSR matrix
 * SciPy DoK matrix
 * SciPy LiL matrix



Part A (2.5p)
-------------

Read the data from the given file.

Create a function __assemble(matrix, ij, values)__ that assembles into the existing matrix __matrix__ from the given input `ij` and `values`.
This should be done by looping over the input data and adding values into correct positions!

The function must print timing information for its body.

For each of the matrix formats listed above:

  * Create an empty matrix of the correct format and with datatype float.
  * Assemble into the matrix using the function assemble.

List the timing information for the different matrix types above.

*Note: The assemble function should be general and it should be possible to add aditional matrix-types without changing the code in assemble!*


Part B (1p)
-----------

Create a function __multiply(matrix, rounds)__ that calculates __result = matrix * matrix__ repeated __rounds__ times.
The function must print timing information for its body.

For each of the matrix formats listed above, call the function __multiply__ specifying __100 rounds__ in order to obtain a stable average time for benchmarking.

List the timing information for the different matrix types above.


Part C (0.5p)
-------------

Add timing information to your code so that the full run (including: creating the matrix, assembling the data and multiplying round times) is included.

List the timing information for the different matrix types above.


Part D (1p)
-----------

As can be seen from part A - C, some formats are better for assembling and others for processing (multiplication in our case).

Choose one type for assembling and another for multiplication so that the total time (including converting from the first to the second type) is the shortest.

List the timing information for the different combinations and pick the best one.



Question 3 (6p total)
==========

In creating an application we need to use two different external libraries. Unfortunately these libraries are expecting us to present
the same (or components of the same) data to them in different formats!

Library A expects us to feed it a sequence (or list) of Python dictinaries, where the dictionary must have the keys "Name", "Age" and "Type".

Libary B (an older one) expect us to provide a sequence of names.

Part A (2p)
-----------
Read the data in the file "data.txt" and create the needed data structure using dictionaries to store each item. The data structure should
be used directly in the call to library A. 


The format of "data.txt" is: \newline
__type, name, age__

To verify the resulting data structure print the result using (assuming your created data structure is called __data__):
```python
for item in data:
    print(item)
```

Part B (4p)
-----------
Create an iterator __ExtractNames__ that can be used to wrap the structure from Part A in the call to library B. I.e. ExtractNames should
return a sequence of names.

*Hint: See the lecture notes on iterators.*

To verify the result, print the output using:
```python
print(list(ExtractNames(data)))
```

Question 4 (8p total)
==========

In December 1998 NASA launched the Mars Climate Orbiter. This $327.6 million research project
ended prematurely when the orbiter crashed into mars due to not properly handling american and SI
units. These are the catastrophic errors that can be caused by using simple floating point numbers
without keeping track of units.

Part A (1.5p)
-----------
Create an (empty) base class __DistanceUnit__ and subclass this into __Meter__ and __Foot__ (they should inherit
from DistanceUnit). Meter and Foot should define a variable for scaling the value to the SI unit
(which would be 1.0 for Meter, and 0.3048 for Foot).

Part B (1.5p)
-----------
Create a class __Distance__ whose constructor takes a magnitude and a DistanceUnit as input. The
constructor in Distance should check that the unit is a DistanceUnit (this can be done with the
`issubclass` function) and if not, raise a suitable error.

Part C (5p)
-----------
Overload the following in Distance:

 *  `+` The result from the + operation should be a new Distance with the same unit as the left hand operand, e.g. meter + foot should
    have it’s results in meter and foot + meter sould have the result in foot.
 *  `-` Should have the same behavior as +.
 *  `*` Multiplication with a (unitless) factor. Both `__rmul__` and `__mul__` should be supported (e.g. 3.4 * x and x * 3.4).
 *  `/` division between “Distance/Distance” should return a (unitless) factor, and division with a (unitless) factor “Distance/float”
    should return a Distance. You can use isinstance or type to check what to use. Hint: `__truediv__` is the normal division in Python 3.
 *  The `str` conversion so that it is printed nicely (add suitable functionality to the units to support this).

These units should be able to handle:
```python
>>> meter = Distance(1, Meter)
>>> foot = Distance(1, Foot)
>>>
>>> x = 1.2 * meter
>>> y = 3.7 * foot
>>>
>>> print("x =", x)
x = 1.2m
>>> print("y*2 =", y*2)
y = 7.4ft
>>> print("x+y =", x + y)
x+y = 2.32776m
>>> print("(3.5m - 6.1ft)/5 =", (3.5 * meter - 6.1 * foot)/5)
(3.5m - 6.1ft)/5 = 0.328144m
>>> print("x/y =", x / y)
x/y = 1.0640561821664183
```

*Note:You may not assume that Meter and Foot are the only possible units. It should be possible to add new
DistanceUnits without modifying the Distance class!*
