---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage[margin=1.9cm]{geometry}
---


Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 21st August 2018 8:30-13:30

**Teacher:** Thomas Svedberg (031-772 1522)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 10:00 and 12:00

**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number
(from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do
not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder,
e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the
end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced through Ladok, on or before September 11.
The review will be the same day (11th) 12:20-13:00 at Hörsalsvägen 7b, 3:rd floor.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 25 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage


# Question 1: Detecting file tampering (6p total)

A common security technique, for ensuring that no malicious attacker have managed to tamper with important files, is to
generate so called "checksums" or "hashes" for all files. These are short, almost unique strings computed with an
algorithm that makes it's very hard to insert changes to any file without also modifying the hash.

Using multiple hash-algorithms makes the likelyhood of a attacker sneaking in an attack even less likely.

Part A (3p)
-----------

You have been given a file containing hashes for a couple of files, `checksums.txt`.
The format of this file is;
```text
"path to file"  hash_algorithm:hash_in_hex  hash_algorithm:hash_in_hex
...
```
A file can have one or more different hashes.

Write a function `read_checksums` that takes a filename as argument, parses the given file and returns a dictionary that
maps paths to a dictionary of hashes.

```python
>>> checksums_db = read_checksums('checksums.txt')
>>> print(checksums_db)
{'testfiles/correcting_exams.png': {'md5': 'eaee750...', 'sha256':'a53f94...'}, 
...
}
```

*Hint: `defaultdict` from `collections` may be used.*

Part B (3p)
-----------

Write a function `verify_files` that takes dictionary from part A and verifies all the checksums listed.
If a file is missing, print a helpful error that an attacker might have deleted it, then proceed with the rest of
the files.
If the hash doesn't match, print a message that shows filename, algorithm and the mismatched hashes.

```text
>>> verify_files(checksums_db)
Error! "testfiles/filename with spaces.txt" differs from md5:83b0a... (eecc...)
Error! "testfiles/filename with spaces.txt" differs from sha256:152b... (f54b...)
Error! "testfiles/another dir/missing.txt" missing
```

Use the `hashlib` module to compute the actual hashes of the file contents.
You want to use the `hexdigest` method (because the hashes in `checksums.txt` are also stored as hex strings).

*Hint: hashlib digest command expects binary data, so you should `open` the files in binary mode.*

*For testing, you may move the `testfiles` to your working directory, or use relative paths if you prefer, but don't
alter the directory contents.*

\newpage


# Question 2: Evaluating results (6p total)
As a result of an evaluation we have found that the process we are studying can be described by the function
$y = f (x) = (x - a)^2 + b \ sin(x)$ with $a = 2$ and $b = 15$.

To continue our study we need to find the minima and root(s) of this function.
Start by plotting the function in the intervall $-10 <= x <= 10$ to get a feel for how it looks.

Part A (2p)
-----------
Using the function minimize from the SciPy library optimize, find the local minima of the function using the methods:

* Conjugate Gradient (CG)
* Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)
* Powell (Powell)

and the starting guesses for $x$: 1, 5, 7, 10.

Print the resulting x, y values for each combination of method and start guess with appropriate labels.

Part B (1p)
-----------
Find the global minima of the function using a global optimization method from the optimize library.
Print the resulting x, y values with appropriate labels.

Part C (1p)
------------
Find the roots ($f (x) = 0$) of the function using a suitable method from the optimize library.
Print the resulting x, y values with appropriate labels.

*Hint: You probably need to give different start guesses to find the different roots!*

Part D (2p)
-----------
Using a 2x2 subplot grid, plot the function for $-10 <= x <= 10$ in each subplot.

For each of the local methods in Part A, mark the minima found with a suitable marker in subplots 1-3.
In the fourth subplot, mark the global minima and roots with suitable markers. Make sure to use different markers for
minima and roots.

In all subplots add a title, axis labels etc.

*Hint: Matplotlib manual is extensive. You will likely find what you need in part I.*

\newpage

# Question 3: Bank accounts (6p total)

We want to implement a base class `BankAccount`, and subclasses `SavingsAccount` and `SpendingAccount`.

Part A (2p)
-----------
Write a base class `BankAccount`
*You should implement (or make abstract) the methods below in the base class, and overload them in the subclasses
when necessary.*

The following methods should be supported:

  * `available_amount()` returns the value of the account.
  * `withdraw(amount)` withdrawing the given amount from the account.
  * `deposit(amount)` deposit the given amount to the account.

Implement support so that the accounts can be printed; see example below.

Part B (2p)
-----------
Implement the subclasses `SavingsAccount` and `SpendingAccount`.

Savings account: Accounts are not allowed to be overdrafted (no negative amount).

Spending account: Accounts are allowed to be overdrafted to -5000 SEK, with a 10% overdraft fee (up to 500 SEK).

Add a method `apply_overdraft_fee()` to `SpendingAccount` that withdraws the overdraft fee from the account when called.


Part C (2p)
-----------
Write and make appropriate use of a exception `OverdraftException` where an order cannot be complied with.
Have the exception contain all relevant information about the failed transaction.

Also add exceptions when 'withdraw' or 'deposit' are called with negative numbers

Example:
```python
>>> account = SavingsAccount(1500)
>>> print(account)
Account: 1500 SEK.
>>> account.deposit(400)
>>> print(account)
Account: 1900 SEK
>>> try:
>>>     account.withdraw(2000)
>>> except OverdraftException as ex:
>>>     print(ex)
Order cannot be completed, insufficient funds on account: 1900 < 2000
```

\newpage

# Question 4: Transposing a matrix (7p total)

Matrices are a building block for a lot of code, and many mathematical expressions require the use of a transpose to
express in a convenient manner.

While this can be achieved by duplicating the memory; copying the data while switching rows and columns, it can also
be accomplished by letting the matrix object itself remember whether or not it is transposed, without any need for
"copies"!

Part A (1p)
-----------

Make a base class `Matrix` that store the size in `rows` and `cols`.
This class should have 2 abstract methods;

 - `.transpose()` - The transposing method returns a matrix with transposed values.
 - `[i,j]` - The indexing operator for getting values from the matrix, i.e. `__getitem__`.

*The true power of this transpose technique is shown when doing matrix algebra, but requires to much code for an exam*


Part B (2p)
-----------

Create the subclass `DenseMatrix` which takes the argument `values` and `transposed` (default `False`) as inputs to
it's constructor.
Transposing should return a new matrix, but without copying `values`.

```python
>>> x = DenseMatrix([[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]])
>>> x_t = x.transpose()
>>> print(x[1,2], x_t[1,2])
6 8
```

Part C (1p)
-----------

Create a abstract subclass `SymmetricMatrix` where you can trivially overload `tranpose()`.

*The purpose of this class is to serve as a basis for all types of symmetric matrices, like diagonal, banded, sparse,
etc. Though you will only need to implement one such subclass in part D*

*Hint: What happens what you transpose a symmetric matrix?*

Part D (3p)
-----------

Create a subclass `BandedMatrix` (short for `BandedSymmetricMatrix`) from `SymmetricMatrix` which represents a banded symmetric matrix.

Banded matrices have all their nonzero values are stored close to the diagonal.
This means they can efficiently store very large matrices by skipping out the sections where there are only zeroes.

Example of banded matrix and it's internal representation:
```python
 1  2  3  0  0  0  0          banded = BandedMatrix([[1,2,3],
 2  4  5  6  0  0  0                                 [4,5,6],
 3  5  7  8  9  0  0                                 [7,8,9],
 0  6  8 10 11 12  0   ===>                          [10,11,12],
 0  0  9 11 13 14 15                                 [13,14,15],
 0  0  0 12 14 16 17                                 [16,17],
 0  0  0  0 15 17 18                                 [18]])
```

\newpage
*Test code:* 
```python
def debug_print_matrix(m):
    for i in range(m.rows):
        for j in range(m.cols):
            print('{:2}'.format(m[i, j]), end=' ')
        print()


dense = DenseMatrix([[1,2,3,4,5],[5,4,3,2,1],[0,0,0,0,0],[1,1,1,1,1],[1,0,1,0,1]])

print('Dense matrix:')
debug_print_matrix(dense)
print('Dense matrix transpose:')
debug_print_matrix(dense.transpose())

banded = BandedMatrix([[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9],[10,11],[12]])

print('Banded matrix:')
debug_print_matrix(banded)
print('Banded matrix transpose:')
debug_print_matrix(banded.transpose())
```
*Output:*
```
Dense matrix:
 1  2  3  4  5 
 5  4  3  2  1 
 0  0  0  0  0 
 1  1  1  1  1 
 1  0  1  0  1 
Dense matrix transpose:
 1  5  0  1  1 
 2  4  0  1  0 
 3  3  0  1  1 
 4  2  0  1  0 
 5  1  0  1  1 
Banded matrix:
 1  2  3  0  0 
 2  4  5  6  0 
 3  5  7  8  9 
 0  6  8 10 11 
 0  0  9 11 12 
Banded matrix transpose:
 1  2  3  0  0 
 2  4  5  6  0 
 3  5  7  8  9 
 0  6  8 10 11 
 0  0  9 11 12 
 ```

