---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage[margin=1.9cm]{geometry}
---


Exam for the course DAT171 Object oriented programming in Python
===========

**Time:** 15th August 2017 8:30-13:30

**Teachers:** Thomas Svedberg (office/mobile: 031- 772 1522), Mikael Öhman (mobile: 0736 837 674)

**Permitted aids:** Cay Horstmann: Python for everyone. Manuals and lecture notes are available on the computers.

**Teacher will visit the rooms:** Around 10:00 and 12:00

**Formalities**: In each file you hand in, you should write your examination code. Also enter the computer number (from the exam cover).

The documentation and lectures notes are available on `C:\__EXAM__`. Verify that these files are there immediately.
Handing in the code should be done under the same folder: `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\`, when you are finished. If you do not store the files here, they are not included in the exam. Save the files for each question in the appropriate folder, e.g. `C:\__EXAM__\Assignments\Question1\`.
*Make sure you only hand in one solution for each question, otherwise you will receive **zero** points.*
Complex sections of your code should have a descriptive comment of what is achieved.

When you finish the exam you should log out and fill in the (empty) exam cover page like normal and hand this in at the end of the exam.

**Corrections:** The results will be announced at the latest on XXth of XXXXXXX on the course homepage.
The review will be the same day (XXth) 12:20-13:00 and on the XXst of XXXXXXX 12:20-13:00, both times at Hörsalsvägen 7b,
3:rd floor.

**Grading:** 
There is a total of 25 points which yields grades at the standard 40%, 60%, and 80% limits:
```python
def grade(points):
    if points >= 20:
        return 'Grade 5'
    elif points >= 15:
        return 'Grade 4'
    elif points >= 10:
        return 'Grade 3'
    else:
        return 'Fail'
```

\newpage

Question 1 (5p total)
==========

Mad Libs is a phrasal template word game where one player prompts others for a list of numbers to substitute for blanks in a story, before reading the – often comical or nonsensical – story aloud.

A typical Mad Libs story may look like:
```
[exclamation]! he said [adverb] as he jumped into his convertible
[noun] and drove off [verb ending in ING] his favourite song with 
his [adjective] wife.
```


Part A (2p)
----------

Write a function `extract_mad_libs(filename)` that parses out all the placeholders from the story contained in the file.

The function should take a filename and return a list of each type of word requested.
You should test your code against `job_interview.txt`

Example:
```python
>>> placeholders = extract_mad_libs('some_madlib_story.txt')
>>> print(placeholders)
['exclamation', 'noun', 'verb ending in ING', 'adjective']
```

You **may** assume that the brackets `[]` are only ever used for the placeholder words, and that they are never broken up by line-breaks.


Part B (3p)
----------

Write a function `apply_mad_libs(input_filename, words, output_filename)` that takes a list of words and a filename to a Mad-libs story, and writes the output to output file.

Normally, one would use the list from Part A to ask the player to input each word, but for the sake of testing this code, you can use the pre-made list of words given in `job_interview_words.py`.

Use:
```python
>>> word_list = ['sad', 'upset', ...
>>> apply_mab_libs('job_interview.txt', word_list, 'funny_job_interview.txt')
```

\newpage

Question 2 (5p total)
=====================

In this task NumPy / SciPy **must** be used for any array-type of numerical data.

The NumPy / SciPy libraries consists of routines for efficient numerical calculations.
Key to achieving good performance using these libraries is efficiently using the built in methods for 
slicing, selection and filtering of arrays, as well as avoiding explicit looping.

**NOTE! You should use no loops whatsoever** for this question!

Part A (1p)
-----------
 * Read the data from the file named "values.txt" into NumPy-array `a`.
 * Reformat `a` into array `b` that should have 2 blocks each of 4 rows and 3 columns. We define blocks as associated with the *first* index, rows the second index, and columns the third index; `[block, row, column]`
 * Print `a` and `b` to the screen, include labels (i.e. `a = [[ ....`)

Part B (1p)
-----------
Slicing. Using `b` from above, separately print:

 * block 0
 * row 2
 * column 1
 * block 1 with the rows reversed

(i.e. 4 print statements)

Part C (1p)
-----------
Selection and filtering. Using `b` from above; Create mask-arrays:

 * `c`: Marking all elements `< 50`
 * `d`: Marking all elements `>= 50 and < 75`
 * `e`: Marking all elements `>= 75`

Print the arrays above, with labels as in task A.

Use the mask-arrays above and print the elements from `b`:

 * `< 50`
 * `>= 50 and < 75`
 * `>= 75`

Part D (2p)
-----------
For each block in `b`, we want to find and print the row with the highest sum of its values.
To do this, you should perform the following sub-tasks:

For each block in `b`, find the row with the highest sum. Print the resulting row-sums.

Find the  position of the highest value among the row-sums above (for each block).

*Hint: Look at `argmax` in NumPy*

For block 0 and block 1, respectively, print the row with the highest sum. 
Remember to print labels for all your output.

**Remember: Any explicit loops in your code will render zero points for that task!**


\newpage

Question 3 (6p total)
=====================

A common type matrix pattern is of matrix has the form:
$$
A = \begin{pmatrix} K & G \\ G^T & 0 \end{pmatrix}
$$
where the $K$ matrix is the main system of equations for some problem, and the $G$ matrix is a set of additional constraints on the system.

Part A (4p)
-------
Write a class `ConstrainedMatrix` which takes references to a matrix `k` and a matrix `g` and represents the $A$ matrix described above.
We wish to save memory here, so do not store any unnecessary copies of the matrices.

Implement:

 * the method `size()` which returns a tuple of the total matrix size.
 * the method `dot_product(x)` which takes a vector $x$ and returns the dot product $A \cdot x$.

The sub-matrices `k` and `g` and the vector `x` must be numpy arrays. The return value from the dot product should be a numpy array as well.
 
The dot product (skalärprodukt) is computed by:
$$
\begin{aligned}
M \cdot x &= \sum_j M_{ij} x_j \\
M^T \cdot x &= \sum_j M_{ji} x_j
\end{aligned}
$$

In `dot_product`, make use the fact that
$$
\begin{aligned}
A \cdot x = \begin{pmatrix} K & G \\ G^T & 0 \end{pmatrix} \cdot \begin{pmatrix} x_k \\ x_g \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} K \cdot x_k + G \cdot x_g \\ G^T \cdot x_k \end{pmatrix}
\end{aligned}
$$

*Hint: You can determine the shape of a numpy array by using `k.shape` which is a tuple with the sizes.*

Part B (2p)
-----------
Write a custom exception `MatrixSizeMismatch`. Have the initialization of `ConstrainedMatrix` return this error with an informative error message if `k` and `g` doesn't have the same number of rows.
**Also** write a simple test code that catches the exception.


Example:
```python
k = np.array([[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]])
g = np.array([[1,0],[0,-1],[-1,1]])
x = np.array([1,0,2,3,0])

a = ConstrainedMatrix(k, g)
v = a.dot_product(x) 
print(v) # should be [10, 16, 22, -1, 2]
```

\newpage

Question 4 (9p total)
=====================

When writing an analytical math tool, you will have the need to manipulate functions themselves.
An important special case are functions that take a single scalar input and output, such as $\sin$, $\cos$, or $\log$.

In this question, we will consider such scalar functions as represented by simple classes to create objects which we can evaluate and construct function derivatives from. 

**You may want to do B.1 and B.2 before doing A.2 and A.3!**


Part A.1 (2p)
------------
Create a base class `Function` with 2 abstract methods:

* ```.__call__(x)``` which evaluates the function at $x$
* ```.derivate()``` which returns a `Function` that represents the derivative of self, e.g. `Sine` should return a `Cosine` object.

Also overload the $-f$ (negation) and $a+b$ operators by making use of the `Negate` and `Sum` classes you will implement next (if you call them correctly here you will get full points even if you don't do A.2 or A.3).

*Hint: The `__call__` method makes an object "callable", e.g:*
```python
>>> f = Sine() # f represents sin
>>> f(3.14) # == f.__call__(3.14)
0.0015926529164868282
```

*Hint: `__neg__` is the negation method.*


Part A.2 (1p)
------------
Implement the subclass `Negate` which takes another `Function` and represents the negation of it.
The derivative of a negated function is the negated derivate of the function: $\frac{d}{dx} (-f) = -\frac{df}{dx}$

```python
>>> f = Negate(Sine())
>>> f(3.14)
-0.0015926529164868282
```

Part A.2 (2p)
------------
Implement the subclass `Sum`  which takes a list of `Function`s and represents the sum of them.
The derivative of a sum is the sum of the derivatives: $\frac{d}{dx}(\sum f) = \sum (\frac{df}{dx})$

```python
>>> f = Sum(Cosine(), Negate(Sine())  # f represents cos(*) - sin(*)
>>> f(3.14)
-1.0015913846440263
```

**Part B on next page**

\newpage

Part B.1 (2p)
-------------
Implement the subclasses `Sine` and `Cosine`.
Use corresponding functions from `math` in order to actually compute the values when they are called.

Reminder: Derivative of $\sin$ is $\cos$, derivative of $\cos$ is $-\sin$.

Part B.2 (0.5p)
---------------
Implement the subclass `Constant` which takes a fixed value to return when called.

Part B.3 (1.5p)
-------------
Implement the subclass `Polynomial` which takes a coefficient and an exponent.
This class only represents a single term; $a \times x^b$. 
The derivative method should return a `Constant` when applicable.

*Hint: Powers ($a^b$) are done using the `**` operator: `a**b`*

*Note: We could make these classes much more useable if we added many more types and overloaded more operators, but we limit ourselves for this question to illustrate the idea.*

Example:
-------
```python
 f= -Sine() + Constant(5.7) + Polynomial(2,3)  # f(x) = -sin(x) + 5.7 + 2*x**3
print("f(1.5)  =", f(1.5))
df = f.derivative() # f'(x) = cos(x) + 6*x**2
print("f'(1.5) =", df(1.5))

g = Sum([Sine(), Negate(Cosine()), Constant(1)]) # g(x) = sin(x) - cos(x) + 1
print("g(0.3)  =", g(0.3))
dg = g.derivative() # g'(x) = cos(x) + sin(x)
print("g'(0.3) =", dg(0.3))

h = ((-f) + g).derivative()  # h(x) = - 6*x**2 + sin(x)
print("h(3.2)  =", h(3.2))
```

Output:
------
```
f(1.5)  = 11.452505013395946
f'(1.5) = 13.429262798332298
g(0.3)  = 0.3401837175357336
g'(0.3) = 1.2508566957869456
h(3.2)  = -63.4949636950171
```

